History is like a pendulum; it sways to and fro, but is destined to repeat
itself as is has before. Our society suffers from too little precedent, but we
have built up a library enough to see some clear trends.

As a nation with historical emphasis on historical record keeping, China's
history is deeply intertwined with writing. Scholars would learn and recite
historical works, and until the 20 th century wrote using almost the same
written grammar as their forefathers had for roughly 2000 years.

Chinese history, through its cycles of construction, deconstruction, and
revolution, has points in its history at crossroads. The decisions made at
these crossroads in time lay the foundation for modern China, and at each such
point the future could have led to a very different land to that we know now.

One such event, which is the focus of this essay, concerns Lǐ Sī, first prime
minister of the Qin dynasty (221 - 206 BCE). Lǐ Sī was appointed by the
emperor, Qín Shǐ Huáng, following the latter's unification of China proper for
the first time. Although the country was unified politically, it had previously
been made up of the Zhōu states, which were governed independently and
differed notably in culture. In fact, not only were they independent in
culture, but also in writing system.

Chinese characters by this point had evolved quite substantially since their
gradual birth sometime before 1000 BCE. In particular, the characters were no
longer simple pictographs, they had become ideographs. This meant that, in
addition to pictographs (drawings of things), there were now logographs
(drawings of concepts) and ideographs with rebus components (characters that
use semantic or meaning components as well as phonetic components).

Moreover, because of the disunity of the Zhōu states' governance, sinographs
had diverged substantially between region. The characters of the old Zhōu
states were sometimes the same, but sometimes differed stylistically, or even
drastically [see fig]. Lǐ Sī believed that in order to govern the new Qin
state, he would need to standardize characters. This finds western parallels to
Charlemagne, who standardized the cursive form of the latin alphabet to produce
what we know as the lowercase latin alphabet, but perhaps even more so to
some of the later script reform in East Asia that took place in the 20 th
century.

Lǐ's motivations for orthographic reform were quite particular. On one hand, it
was necessary for the newly created state bureaucracy to communicate using a
common literary language. In this sense, Lǐ's motivation for reform was
identical to that of Charlemagne in Europe to unify the script of officials and
their scribes. On another hand, China has a history at many points of
linguistic suppression, and this can be seen as an early implementation of this
policy.

Other linguistic interventionism has occurred throughout chinese history,
including around this time. Qín Shǐ Huáng's personal name, Zhèng (政) and
possibly its homophone (正) became taboo to write, and the emperor took the
personal pronoun zhèn (朕) for his exclusive use, thereby prompting a
linguistic shift towards different pronouns.

In this case, Lǐ's script reform had the additional benefit of censorship. It
relegated the possibility of using codes to communicate between officials or
commoners, and may have been suppressed publically as a display of disloyalty.

The alternative to Lǐ's language reform could very well have seen the chinese
writing system fragment, as it had to some degree at that point, and
disintegrated China proper's current (albeit quite imperfect) coherence of
linguistic heritage.

Lǐ's move established the authority of the central state, introduced efficiency
and communication benefits on a national level, and promoted a common language
of the officialship. Not unlike China's 20 th century move to simplified
characters.

Casting our eyes to the movement of simplified chinese, it's important to
understand some differences in motives. Simplified chinese characters had
several principles, including:

- Sinographs were seen as an impediment to China achieving mass literacy.
- Sinographs were incredibly numerous beyond what could be effectively recorded
  in a dictionary. The Kangxi dictionary, published in 1716 by imperial decree,
  took 6 years to develop, and contained over 47,000 characters. By comparison,
  Lǐ Sī's list of standardized characters was 3,300. Some 40 % of the
  characters in the Kangxi dictionary are estimated to be graphical variants
  only.
- There were too many sinographs to realistically learn for one person.
- Regional variation was extensive, including by other chinese varieties to
  reflect grammar exclusive to that language.
- Sinographs were associated with China's ancien régime, including ineffective
  bureaucracy and the country's weakness to internal and external threats.

Japan had a script reform in the 1880s, although minor, and different in reach.
Japan's script reform achieved the following:

- Restrict the number of sinographs to around 1800, with the intention to
  shrink this number over time.
- Replace certain words and characters with phonetic Japanese script.
- Replace semantically similar homophones with unified characters.
- Improve literacy, in particular for women.

China's reform, which came in the 1960s, ultimately achieved a lot more,
including chaos. Such chaos is not documented in the accounts of the Qín
dynasty, though it is in modern accounts. Mao Zedong was originally in favor of
phasing out sinographs altogether and replacing them with a phonetic alphabet.
It was originally this which pinyin was created for. However, these plans were
scrapped due to opposition, and instead as part of a people's revolution,
the populus was encouraged to participate with the simplification process, but
making up characters themselves.

As you can imagine, this was chaotic. Even now, some of these variant
characters linger on throughout China in handwriting, some signs, and even
people whose family changed surname in the revolution because their surname as
it was written was disallowed, or they wanted to simplify their names. The
legacy of the system is families unable to accurately retrace their history,
including families where one branch now bears a different surname to another
branch. Unicode even had to include some of these new variant characters as
they were common in handwriting. And so, ironically, through trying to
standardize the chinese writing system further, Mao suceeded in making more
characters to learn, upending tradition, and overturning social order.

How similar are these events? Lǐ Sī was something of a Machiavellian type
within China's history, and ultimately met his demise in a coup after the death
of the sitting emperor. He standardized a writing system that remained little
changed for 2000 years, until another revolutionary would come along with the
same ideas, and the political influence to see these plans carried out.

The current paradigm of the sinosphere is a legacy from the authority and
systems constructed by Mao. Were China to have taken different decisions, not
only could it have led to a different writing system, perhaps a simpler one, a
return to traditional writing, or a loss of the writing system altogether not
only from China, but even neighboring Japan and Greater China.

History reached another fork in the road, and this is the path we walk down.


